The goals of this book
There are a number of possible introductions to the field of algebraic geome-
try: Riemann surfaces; complex geometry; the theory of varieties; a nonrigorous
examples-based introduction; algebraic geometry for number theorists; an abstract
functorial approach; and more. All have their place. Different approaches suit dif-
ferent students (and different advisors). This book takes only one route.
Our intent is to cover a canon completely and rigorously, with enough exam-
ples and calculations to help develop intuition for the machinery. This is often
the content of a second course in algebraic geometry, and in an ideal world, peo-
ple would learn this material over many years, after having background courses
in commutative algebra, algebraic topology, differential geometry, complex analy-
sis, homological algebra, number theory, and French literature. We do not live in
an ideal world. For this reason, the book is written as a first introduction, but a
challenging one.
This book seeks to do a very few things, but to try to do them well. Our goals
and premises are as follows.
The core of the material should be digestible over a single year. After a
year of blood, sweat, and tears, readers should have a broad familiarity with the
foundations of the subject, and be ready to attend seminars, and learn more ad-
vanced material. They should not just have a vague intuitive understanding of
the ideas of the subject; they should know interesting examples, know why they
are interesting, and be able to work through their details. Readers in other fields
of mathematics should know enough to understand the algebro-geometric ideas
that arise in their area of interest.
This means that this book is not encyclopedic, and even beyond that, hard
choices have to be made. (In particular, analytic aspects are essentially ignored,
and are at best dealt with in passing without proof. This is a book about algebraic
algebraic geometry.)
This book is usable (and has been used) for a course, but the course should
(as always) take on the personality of the instructor. With a good course, people
should be able to leave early and still get something useful from the experience.
With this book, it is possible to leave without regret after learning about category
theory, or about sheaves, or about geometric spaces, having become a better per-
son.
The book is also usable (and has been used) for learning on your own. But
most mortals cannot learn algebraic geometry fully on their own; ideally you
should read in a group, and even if not, you should have someone you can ask
questions to (both stupid and smart questions).
There is certainly more than a year’s material here, but I have tried to make
clear which topics are essential, and which are not. Those teaching a class will
choose which “inessential” things are important for the point they wish to get
across, and use them.
There is a canon (at least for this particular approach to algebraic geometry). I
have been repeatedly surprised at how much people in different parts of algebraic
geometry agree on what every civilized algebraic geometer should know after a
first (serious) year. (There are of course different canons for different parts of the
subject, e.g., complex algebraic geometry, combinatorial algebraic geometry, com-
putational algebraic geometry, etc.) There are extra bells and whistles that different
instructors might add on, to prepare students for their particular part of the field
or their own point of view, but the core of the subject remains unified, despite the
diversity and richness of the subject. There are some serious and painful compro-
mises to be made to reconcile this goal with the previous one.
Algebraic geometry is for everyone (with the appropriate definition of “ev-
eryone”). Algebraic geometry courses tend to require a lot of background, which
makes them inaccessible to all but those who know they will go deeply into the
subject. Algebraic geometry is too important for that; it is essential that many of
those in nearby fields develop some serious familiarity with the foundational ideas
and tools of the subject, and not just at a superficial level. (Similarly, algebraic ge-
ometers uninterested in any nearby field are necessarily arid, narrow thinkers. Do
not be such a person!)
For this reason, this book attempts to require as little background as possible.
The background required will, in a technical sense, be surprisingly minimal — ide-
ally just some commutative ring theory and point-set topology, and some comfort
with things like prime ideals and localization. This is misleading of course — the
more you know, the better. And the less background you have, the harder you will
have to work — this is not a light read. On a related note...
The book is intended to be as self-contained as possible. I have tried to
follow the motto: “if you use it, you must prove it”. I have noticed that most
students are human beings: if you tell them that some algebraic fact is in some late
chapter of a book in commutative algebra, they will not immediately go and read
it. Surprisingly often, what we need can be developed quickly from scratch, and
even if people do not read it, they can see what is involved. The cost is that the
book is much denser, and that significant sophistication and maturity is demanded
of the reader. The benefit is that more people can follow it; they are less likely to
reach a point where they get thrown. On the other hand, people who already have
some familiarity with algebraic geometry, but want to understand the foundations
more completely, should not be bored, and can focus on more subtle issues.
As just one example, Krull’s Principal Ideal Theorem 11.3.3 is an important
tool. I have included an essentially standard proof (§11.5). I do not want people
to read it (unless they really really want to), and signal this by a double-star in the
title: ⋆⋆. Instead, I want people to skim it and realize that they could read it, and
that it is not seriously hard.
This is an important goal because it is important not just to know what is true,
but to know why things are true, and what is hard, and what is not hard. Also,
this helps the previous goal, by reducing the number of prerequisites.
The book is intended to build intuition for the formidable machinery of al-
gebraic geometry. The exercises are central for this (see §0.0.1). Informal language
can sometimes be helpful. Many examples are given. Learning how to think
cleanly (and in particular categorically) is essential. The advantages of appropriate
generality should be made clear by example, and not by intimidation. The mo-
tivation is more local than global. For example, there is no introductory chapter
explaining why one might be interested in algebraic geometry, and instead there
is an introductory chapter explaining why you should want to think categorically
(and how to actually do this).
Balancing the above goals is already impossible. We must thus give up any
hope of achieving any other desiderata. There are no other goals.
